
--------------------------------------------------
PEBL: Psychology Experiment Building Language
http://pebl.sourceforge.net
pebl-list at lists  sourceforge  net
http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/pebl-list
--------------------------------------------------


About: 

PEBL is a new programming language and interpreter/compiler designed
to make experiment-writing easy. It is cross-platform, written in C++,
and relies on a Flex/Bison parser. Although other platforms are
possible, we currently use the SDL game-programming library
(http://libsdl.org) to easily support multiple platforms with one code
base. PEBL does not require you to purchase anything in order to use
it. It does not require a compiler or experience using any other
programming system.  PEBL is designed to be an open system.  It
requires no licensing or registration fees to use, and you can re-use
the source code as long as you abide by the GNU GPL. This allows you
to freely share your experiments with others without worrying about
licenses, vendor lock-in, or whether you will be able to run your
experiments down the road when your current hardware systems are
obsolete. 


                 RELEASE NOTES


--------------------------------------------------
Version 0.05
July 2005

The fifth PEBL release (named 0.05 rather than 0.5) focuses on memory
management and other infrastructure.  There are few user-visable changes,
but there are substantial beneath-the-hood fixes thanks to memory
profiling tools like memprof and valgrind.  Most of the reckless use
of pointers has been changed to counted pointers; std::string has
replaced most of the use of char*, the parser doesn't leak memory
anymore, the parse tree gets cleaned up properly, and the default
compile options use -pedantic, forcing me to fix all wierd warnings
that will hopefully catch errors as well.

There are a couple cool additions to the syntax.  First, character
strings in programs can span multiple lines, and those linebreaks are
reflected in TextBoxes.  This makes it easier to put instructions
in-line, because you don't have to do "text part one" + " text part
two" to span lines.   Next, I've added a 'break' keyword that allows
you to escape out of loops immediately.  I've also made keywords case
insensitive, as was originally described in the manual but was never
really true.

I've also added the function 'DesignBalancedSampling', which works
sort of like SampleWithReplacement:  You give it a list and a length
of list you need--this list can (should) be longer than the list.  It
will return a list of items which contains multiple shuffled copies
of the original list, so that every instance on the list is present
before any are repeated, and so that there are no direct repeats on
the cusps between lists.  It chops off the last shuffled list.  If
the epoch-shuffling is not desired, one can Shuffle() it afterwards.

For linux users, I've mocked up a script (in the bin/ directory)
that provides a demonstration on how to use the zenity program as a
front-end launcher for your experiments, allowing you to enter things
like subject numbers and conditions before the experiment launches.
For emacs users, there is a new (and simplistic) .el mode available,
which performs syntax highlighting but doesn't do proper indentation
yet.  Finally, earlier this year I released an experimental version of
PEBL 0.4 for Mac OSX, and 0.05 will be the first official release of
PEBL for OSX.


--------------------------------------------------
Version 0.4
March 2, 2005

The fourth release of PEBL is here.  This release includes a bunch of
new functions, some ready-to-run experiments I have prepared, and it
allows you to set the display options as arguments, enabling different
screen sizes, full-screen or windowed operation, and specifying the
SDL driver you want to use.  I am also experimenting with an an
automatic setup utility on Windows that puts PEBL into c:\Program
files\PEBL, creates a PEBL experiment folder in My Documents, and
creates launchers that run these nicely.

Details:

  New Command-line arguments:
  --driver <drivername> 
    e.g., on linux, dga for direct access or xf86 for X11
    driver. No real difference on Windows
     
--display  <widthxheight>
  Controls the screen width and height (in pixels). Defaults to 640x480.
  Currently, only the following screens are supported:
                512x384
                640x480
                800x600
                960x720
                1024x768
                1152x864
                1280x1024
  Note: the way this is invoked may be changed in the future.

--depth
  Controls the pixel depth.  Depends on your video card.  Currently,
  depths of 2,8,15,16,24, and 32 are allowed on the command-line.
--windowed
--fullscreen
  Controls whether the script will run in a window or fullscreen.

  These are accessible on windows through new controls in the launcher
  application.  


  New Functions:
    FoldList
    Flatten
    FlattenN
    Replace
    MoveCorner
    MoveCenter
  

I now include a set of experiments in the 'experiments' directory, which appears
in My Documents\PEBL-exp in windows.  These include:

    cue.pbl:             List learning/Gist recall experiments
    IAT.pbl:             Implicit Association Test (http://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/)
    rsvp.pbl:            A demo trial to test RSVP-type presentation
    lexicaldecision.pbl: Sample lexical decision task
    masking.pbl:         A 2AFC visual perception task with briefly-presented stimuli
    letterstrings:       Another 2AFC task, with letter strings.


Other demo scripts that are not necessarily
full-fledged experiments still live in the PEBL/demo directory. 

   Notes:  There is a scoping/reference counter problem so that some
   memory sometimes doesn't get released properly at the end of a
   program, causing a segfault.  This is annoying, but pretty
   harmless.


--------------------------------------------------
Version 0.3
September 13, 2004

The third public release of PEBL is now available!  In addition
to the fixing of numerous bugs, I have improved the event
handling system for better performance, added an
abort-execution keyboard shortcut, added numerous new
functions, including an all-in-one function that collects
the demographic information required by NIMH, and have enabled
text entry into textboxes.  I have been using and testing
this version for a few months, and I think it is ready to
release.

Details:
 
  * Added an event queue that captures OS events, along with
    'state' events previously handled.
  * TextBoxes are user-editable with the GetInput() function
  * GetNIMHDemographics() collects NIMH data
  * New event-related functions: 
                                         WaitForKeyPress(),
                                         WaitForAnyKeyPress(),
                                         WaitForKeyRelease(),
                                         WaitForListKeyPress(),
                                                         
  * New String handling functions:
                                         Uppercase(),
                                         Lowercase(),
                                         StringLength()
                                         SubString(),
                                         FindInString(),
					                     SplitString()
  
  * Programs can be aborted with <CTRL><ALT><SHIFT><\>
  * Other new functions:
                                    MoveCorner()
	                                GetInput()
                                    SetFont()

--------------------------------------------------
Version 0.2 
January 25, 2004

The second release of PEBL is now available.  In preparing a new experiment,
 I found and fixed many bugs and implemented a dozen or so new functions.  
Highlights include a new textbox object for displaying instructions and other
text, and primitive windows launcher that allows you to set arguments like the 
subject number or condition.

Notes:

 * Primitive TextBox objects are available
 * Several fixes to bugs in grammar
 * Win32 launcher
 * On Windows (tm), PEBL now runs at HIGH priority
 * Included some new sample images.
 * Improved manual modestly.
 * Began implementing useful library of built-in PEBL functions


--------------------------------------------------
Version 0.1
January 3, 2004

I would like to announce the first public release of PEBL, the
cross-platform open source system for creating psychology experiments.
It is incomplete and certainly contains bugs that limit its
usefulness. With this release, it is usable on Linux and Microsoft
Windows.



Notes:  

The first release of PEBL offers basic stimulus presentation and
response collection capabilities.  PEBL can present many different
kinds of images, it can present text using any truetype font, and it
can present sounds stored in the .wav format.  It can collect
responses using a standard computer keyboard. It is designed for
controlling short experiments typically associated with cognitive
psychology, on human subjects using standard computer systems.
Consequently, it does not currently offer the ability to control or
detect external devices, like the kind typically used in animal
research labs (as well as in many cognitive and neuroscience research
programs).

For detailed descriptions on how to use PEBL, consult the PEBL manual
found in the source or executable distributions at doc/manual.txt.

PEBL is still embryonic, and the form it will eventually take will be
driven by what its users want and need.  If you are interested in
guiding its future, sign up to the email list at
http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/pebl-list.  We welcome
contributions at any level; from testing and bug-reporting, to the
creation of new sample experiments, to the writing of documentation,
to web site design and maintenance, to hard-core programming. Come
join us and help build a better system for designing experiments.

Despite its nascent state, the system is sufficient for many types of
experiments.  It currently offers a library of about 125 functions
that allow complex experiments to be created, and simplify many of the
common tasks associated with creating an experiment.  We hope you find
it useful and an attractive alternative to the expensive and
proprietary solutions that currently exist.


Caveats:  

PEBL does not yet have great control over presentation timing,
nor does it manage its priority well so it will easily get
interrupted by the operating system.  Do not rely on this system for
collecting reaction times or presenting tachistoscopic stimuli  
unless it is acceptable to be tens of milliseconds off.  The control
over stimulus presentation is compromised because the SDL library
API does not provide a way to sync with the video card vertical
blank.  Timing in general is compromised by the fact that it runs on
time-sharing operating systems that do not allow for real-time
scheduling.  The timing can be improved by running at a higher
priority and shutting off unnecessary programs, as well as by using
an operating system that supports low-latency kernel pre-emption (like
Linux 2.6).

Many of the documented functions are not implemented yet.  If you
attempt to use an unimplemented function, it will signal a fatal
error that will tell you that the function is not implemented. Sorry
for the inconvenience.

I anticipate making a bug-fix release in early 2004
--------------------------------------------------
